---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: New Years Resolution 2011
date: '2011-01-01 23:16:06 -0500'
date_gmt: '2011-01-02 07:16:06 -0500'
tags: []
---

I've spent a good day thinking about it. I picked up my first video game when
I was 4, and it was the **COOLEST** thing in the entire world. Not only were
the games as a whole just awesome games, but the whole *concept* of video
games, getting tiny little colored dots to display in such a meaningful way
was intriguing.

Or, you know, as intriguing as something can get for a 5 year old. By age 10
my mom was teaching me the basics of programming, and VB.NET (this was back
when .NET 1.1 was the brand new), and I got some ideas like if statements,
loops, etc. Things like object orientation were way over my head at the time.

Still gaming through my pre-teen years, there was a bit of a loss of
interest... not in fascination, but in drive. Maybe it was because I knew it
would be a while before I could have a deep enough understanding to make
anything of any use. I don't really know. I think this was around the time I
picked up runescape, I had yet to discover any mainstream games.

The summer right before high school, I picked up a copy of the Orange Box. I
immediately hopped into Portal and beat it that same night. Over the next week
or so, I became fully immersed in Half-Life 2 and the Episodes. I think I gave
TF2 a little bit of play, my grizzled veteran said I joined just before
Christmas of '07. One thing lead to another, and I discovered Garry's Mod. It
was absolutely amazing and unlike anything I've ever seen. Shortly afterward,
I discovered the Source SDK and Hammer, so I guess my days of innocent
PHX-less, wiremod-less GModding were cut short, but I wasn't complaining.

Up until this last summer, I've been mapping. Absolutely terrible at first (I
still have pictures and the VMF), but after a while, better and better.
There's definitely math involved, but it's really just having a feel for the
tools and knowing how to use them in order to turn a mental image into a
reality. Of course, there were chunks of mapper's block, which takes it's name
from writer's block. It's essentially a period of time where you can't really
start anything or add anything to a current project because you just can't.
Whatever you try comes out badly. For the most part, it didn't affect me, and
when it did, it wouldn't drag out for a long time.

For the most part, I had a few major maps. I had gm_CarBuildNTest, originally
a request by Facepunch user TMLord95, but I ended up modifying the level
layout just a bit, for practicality. This was the closest map I had ever come
to complete. There was just a basement that looked terrible and that I was
remaking over and over, and I was hitting the displacement limit when I tried
to remake it. Give me a few days and I'd release it if I felt motivated to
work on it again. Then there was my diner, which I was building from reference
images from a TV show I used to follow closely before it was cancelled,
Kyle XY. Again, this map was all over the place. It started off afternoon,
then went daytime, then nighttime with Half-Life 2 zombies, and I towards the
end I was turning it into a full fledged campaign for Left 4 Dead 2. Then
there was an ancient Egyptian themed map I was working on for a school project
and decided to continue because I felt I could make it look better, and I did.
I may or may not have images of these maps up on the Mapping page, but if I
don't, I'll probably just hop into a level and snap a few screenshots for it.

This last summer I was really excited. I was at a stage with mapping where
things became natural and I could make things that looked really good. My
pitfall with mapping is my perfectionist tendencies. For 2 years I had never
once released a map or texture pack. I was ready to enter a Facepunch contest
to make a single-player campaign based on Half-Life 2: Episode 2. I started
cracking on it, getting a ton of work done. I hadn't done much work with AI or
particles, so I ended up picking those up through the contest and pushing
onward. I'd say I was about 35-40% done with the project as a whole, ready to
release a second youtube video showing the improvements, but some things
happened, I ended up going to an afternoon SAT boot camp for essentially the
rest of that summer. While I did feel more prepared by taking 8 SAT's in 8
weeks, in 4 hour time slots each, without the breaks, it really dug into all
that free time I had. Digging may not even be the right word for this, it
essentially gave me no time to do anything. The first week was the hardest,
with adjusting and all. I didn't have enough time to just check Facebook for
an entire week.

Needless to say, I never finished that contest. There literally weren't enough
hours in a day to do enough homework to just barely stay out of detention
(yes, they had 1 hour detention for a 4 hour day, and it was possible to get 2
hours. If you somehow were in enough shit to rack up more than 2 detentions,
they would make you stay after class on another day.) and to get a decent
amount of work done on a level. I thought that was going to be the one project
that I'll actually finish, but it wasn't. There was even a 48 hour extension
because people were having a hard time putting the finishing touches on it and
getting it all packaged up and everything. But that gave me about a week to
catch up with everyone else who had another 2 months to work on their
projects. It just wasn't possible.

That was the very moment where it struck me, that despite 2, almost 3 years of
level design, and I hadn't ever released a map. Nothing. Nada. Not so much as
a small construct level. It saddened me, and make me think about everything.
About what will happen in the future, and if I'll ever be able to finish
anything, or if I'll always dabble in something and never be serious enough to
finish a product. It made me thing about how I have next to nothing to show
for 2 years worth of hard work. Of course, I kept thinking. What if I lose
interest in technology? What if I wake up one day, and don't feel inspired by
a video game, by a level, by the prospect of using technology to make
something? I don't have anything to fall back on, and that was really scary to
me. It was a mix of uncertainty and a sudden realization.

For the next few weeks, I couldn't do anything on any of my maps. Mapper's
block had set in pretty quickly, and wouldn't let up, so I eventually took up
programming again, but this time, C#. I find that I can remember most of the
concepts, and go to teach myself the concepts I don't quite understand yet.
Over this last year, I've taken AP Computer Science, which is an introductory
class to Java. I got a few friends together and we're working on something
that's way beyond the scope of the class for our Service Learning project.
Things are looking good, but I can't forget that feeling, and I can't forget
the fact that I have not once released a major project of mine.

As for my resolutions, I hope that this year I will:

 1. Take a video game from concept to completion, available for the public to
    purchase. If this game is the same one I'm working on for Service
    Learning, I'm hoping that we'll be able to make at least 100 sales by the
    end of 2011. Otherwise, just getting the game released will be enough.
 2. Finish a map, release it, and get at least 100 downloads from it by the
    end of 2011. It's been too long for me to never release a map.

And with these two, I'm not going for a shotgun approach where if I solve 1
I'm happy. I must meet both for me to successfully meet my new year's
resolution by Jan 1, 2012. I'm not going to set out to do the impossible and
know I can't achieve it, and I won't do something of trivial difficulty just
so I can say I've met my resolutions. I want to feel challenged, but not
overwhelmed.

To wrap up this, I think I'm going to quote my elementary/middle school art
teacher,

**"The hardest parts of art are starting and stopping"**

I know this is a massive post, it's longer than some essays I've written. If
you've managed to make it this far and have read this entire thing, thanks.
