---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
comments: true
title: I've moved!
date: '2012-07-25 09:43:40 -0400'
date_gmt: '2012-07-25 09:43:40 -0400'
tags: [Software]
---

Now that I just moved to a new domain, I think it's an excellent time to write
a large post about everything I've been doing over the last year or so, and
start writing regularly on this blog.

First off, I competed in Ludum Dare 22 this last December. I never got around
to writing a full post-mortem, and by now all the finer details of my
experience have slipped away, so there won't really ever be a post-mortem for
that game. Still, writing a full game from scratch in under 48 hours is quite
the experience. It really pushes you to get all the low-level technical code
done as quickly as possible so that you have time to actually design the game.
The theme for Ludum Dare 22 was **Alone** so with a little inspiration from
[this xkcd comic][1], I made **Rover's Spirit**, a small top-down "puzzle"
game with only one real puzzle. The full submission can be viewed [here][2].

Looking back at it, I'm actually a bit surprised that I got the ratings that I
did. While the environment was constructed pretty well, the game was very
lacking in content. And from the comments it's clear that I had a lot of
game-crashing bugs and was frantically looking for solutions. The long-term
lessons I've taken away from my participation in Ludum Dare are the following:

 - Before competing in a game jam, make sure you're familiar with your tools
   and know how to handle all aspects of a game (audio was the big issue for
   Rover's Spirit)
 - When making a game of any size, get the technical programming done as
   quickly as possible and get on with the actual design of the game. Only go
   back and add on to the technical stuff when you really need to. Good art
   assets can cover up bad code most of the time.
 - If possible, use third party libraries and game engines. In a competition
   like Ludum Dare, I find it fun (and challenging) to write the game from
   scratch and I won't sink too much time into it since it's only 48 hours,
   but if you scale the time I spent on "engine" code during LD22, using a
   ready-made engine can cut your development time significantly. If your game
   can't be made on any existing game engines, at least use libraries to
   handle physics and anything else that would be standard in your game.
 - Make the asset/level pipeline as nice as possible. In the context of Ludum
   Dare, time is limited so you can't get too fancy with it, but at the same
   time you want to avoid huge time sinks like how I [create][3] [levels][4]
   [in][5] [Rover's][6] [Spirit][7]. Seriously, don't ever spend that much
   time manually calculating offsets for every entity...
 - Failure is just as good as success, as long as you're trying something new
   and putting a lot of effort into it. We learn more from our failures than
   we do from our successes. Even if you don't win a game jam, you still learn
   quite a bit and become a better game developer for it. This short list of
   lessons is proof of that.

I wasn't able to participate in Ludum Dare 23 due to the timing of the
competition, and Ludum Dare 24 will also happen during a very hectic week for
me, but I'll try to enter something anyways.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

I'd also like to mention that since last September, I've made a github account
and have released a lot of my smaller projects under the permissive MIT
license. On there is a project called SharpFont, which are FreeType2 bindings
I've written in C# for any .NET language. It's not quite complete yet (I need
to move some methods around and get Windows 64-bit working), but it does
provide a much nicer interface than the old Tao bindings. I'll post more on
that soon. Also included on my github account is the source for Rover's
Spirit:

[https://github.com/Robmaister][8]

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The last thing I wanted to mention here is the game I've been working on with
my friends for the past few months. Over the past year we've been hopping from
one idea to another but we've finally decided to settle on a single idea and
push forward with it. The screenshots I put up in the previous post are from
that game. Some of the details of the game are still up in the air, so I won't
post much about it until we get close to an alpha build. I'll still post the
occasional screenshot and video as we're developing. In fact, here's the most
recent video of the game showing off recently added Bézier curves:

{% include embed/video.html url='http://www.youtube.com/embed/oPGF904O4n0' %}

[1]: http://xkcd.com/695/
[2]: http://www.ludumdare.com/compo/ludum-dare-22/?action=preview&uid=7668
[3]: https://github.com/Robmaister/RoversSpirit/blob/master/RoversSpirit/AreaCave.cs
[4]: https://github.com/Robmaister/RoversSpirit/blob/master/RoversSpirit/AreaMars.cs
[5]: https://github.com/Robmaister/RoversSpirit/blob/master/RoversSpirit/AreaShip.cs
[6]: https://github.com/Robmaister/RoversSpirit/blob/master/RoversSpirit/AreaUpstairs.cs
[7]: https://github.com/Robmaister/RoversSpirit/blob/master/RoversSpirit/WorldState.cs#L128
[8]: https://github.com/Robmaister
